SDC Tools sprints 3 and 4 (#1276)
CodeYourFuture/curriculum: common-content/en/module/tools/single-use-data-analysis/index.md

+++
title = "Single-use data analysis programs"
headless = true
time = 60
facilitation = false
emoji= "💻"
[objectives]
    1="Write a program to extract information from a JSON file"
    2="Identify the trade-offs between using existing shell tools and writing custom programs"
    3="Choose whether to use existing tools or write a custom program to solve a particular problem"
+++

We've seen two different ways of analysing some input to produce an output.

Sometimes we can use, or combine, existing tools to get answers. For instance, we can count the words in a file with `wc`.

Sometimes we can write custom tools when existing tools don't quite do what we want. For instance, we wrote a program to count specific words.

> When we want to answer some question, sometimes it's useful to write a program that we may only use one time. Or we may re-use in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we want to answer some question, sometimes it's useful to write a program we may only use once. (Or we may re-use in the future.)
```

> It's not always obvious whether it's easier to try to use tools that already exist, or to write our own.

Reviewer: Crying out for a concrete analogy here. Can you find an example in ordinary life like this? Sometimes it's easier to just make ourselves a sandwich than to go to a supermarket in a foreign country. Or something.

Author: I tried, with funnels...!

Sometimes the format of our data makes it easier or harder to use existing tools.

Let's look at some sample data:

```json
[
    {
        "name": "Daniel",
        "score": 100
    },
    {
        "name": "Kristina",
        "score": 120
    },
    {
        "name": "Iulia",
        "score": 95
    },
    {
        "name": "Aleks",
        "score": 190
    },
    {
        "name": "Daniel",
        "score": 80
    },
    {
        "name": "Fatima",
        "score": 110
    }
]
```

Here are a few questions we may want to answer about this data:
1. What was the name of the first person to play the game?
2. What was the name of the last person to play the game?
3. Who had the highest score?
4. The names of everyone who played the game directly after Daniel?

> We can probably answer all of these questions with `jq`. We can also definitely write a program to answer all of these questions for us.

Reviewer: I really like this exercse.
